What is PySpark?
PySpark is Python's interface to Apache Spark, A Distributed computing engine designed to process very large amounts of data across multiple machines.

fundamental idea behind Spark?
Suppose we have 1TB of data, Instead of processing in One computer Spark can distribute it to many/some computer.
Multiple machines process different portions of the data in parallel.

What exactly is Apache Spark?
Apache Spark is a distributed data processing engine.

Spark important components
1. Driver
2. Executors
3. Workers
4. Cluster Manager

Driver?
The Driver is basically the brain/coordinator of your Spark application
Suppose you write:
df = spark.read.csv("customers.csv")
df.filter(df.amount > 1000)
The Driver doesn't necessarily process every row itself. It creates the execution plan and coordinates the work.

Executor?
An Executor is where actual data processing happens. Executors run on worker machines.
Executors: execute tasks, process partitions, store cached data, return results to the Driver

Worker node?
A worker node is a machine in the cluster that provides resources for Spark. Workers host executors
Important distinction:
Worker = machine
Executor = process running on that machine

Cluster Manager?
Spark needs something to allocate machines/resources. That's the job of the Cluster Manager.
Common cluster managers include: Spark Standalone, YARN and Kubernetes

Putting everything together
                spark-code
                     │
                     ▼
                  DRIVER
                     │
                     ▼
             CLUSTER MANAGER
                     │
          ┌──────────┼──────────┐
          ▼          ▼          ▼
       Worker 1   Worker 2   Worker 3
          │          │          │
       Executor   Executor   Executor
          │          │          │
       Tasks      Tasks      Tasks
          │          │          │
       Data       Data       Data

Spark Cluster -
A Cluster is a group of computers (machines) working together

What is a Node?
A single machine in a cluster is called a Node.

Why we need cluster?
The main reason is parallel processing.
Example:
Suppose you have a 1 TB file.
If one machine processes it alone, it may take a long time.
If you have a cluster with 10 nodes, Spark can split the data into multiple partitions.
Each node processes a portion of the data simultaneously.
Since multiple nodes work in parallel, processing becomes much faster.
This is one of the key reasons Spark is widely used for Big Data.

Spark architecture?
Cluster Manager, Driver program / Driver node, worker node and executor
When we run spark code and run it, 
-> every cluster will have cluster Manager now this will start the driver node and that driver node will give all data like how many worker node need and how to execute like all details 
-> this complete detail will given to worker node via cluster manager and now worker node got what to do and in worker node there will be executor where actual task done 
-> now result will be given back to driver node via cluster manager 

DataFrame?
DataFrame is a two-dimensional, distributed data structure that organizes data into rows and columns,
much like a table in a relational database or an Excel spreadsheet.

Partitions?
Suppose you have 100 GB data, Spark doesn't necessarily treat it as one giant object.
It divides it into partitions.

Transformations?
filter()
select()
withColumn()
groupBy()
join()
orderBy()

Lazy evaluation?
df2 = df.filter(df.amount > 1000) When i run this code It doesn't necessarily execute it yet.
Read data
   ↓
Filter amount > 1000
only these will be done at back. but nothing executed
df2.show() now only everything will be executed

Actions?
Actually trigger execution are called actions
show()
count()
collect()
take()
first()
write()

Catalyst Optimizer?
Spark SQL has a powerful query optimizer called the Catalyst Optimizer.
df.filter(df.amount > 1000) \
  .select("name", "amount") \
  .filter(df.city == "Chennai")
Spark doesn't simply execute your Python instructions one by one.
Conceptually -
  Your PySpark code
       ↓
  Logical Plan
       ↓
  Catalyst Optimizer
       ↓
  Optimized Logical Plan
       ↓
  Physical Plan
       ↓
  Execution

Logical plan?
It doesn't yet care exactly which machine does what. (It is like plan in our head)

Physical plan?
How should Spark actually execute it?
df.explain() - using this we can see Physical Plan

DAG?
Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) is precisely a blueprint for how your data will be processed

Jobs?
When you execute an action Spark creates a job
one action triggers one Spark job

Stages?
A job is divided into stages
df.groupBy("city").sum("amount")
Job
 │
 ├── Stage 1
 │
 └── Stage 2

Tasks?
A stage contains tasks

important hierarchy?
Application (code)
    ↓
   Jobs (One Job for One Action)
    ↓
  Stages
    ↓
  Tasks (One Task is for one partition)
A Spark application contains jobs. An action triggers a job. A job is divided into stages at shuffle boundaries. 
Each stage processes a set of partitions, and Spark creates one task for each partition in that stage. Tasks are executed concurrently according to the available executor cores.

Shuffle?
Scenario :- Employee data
employee_id | department | salary
1           | IT         | 50000
2           | HR         | 40000
3           | IT         | 70000
4           | Sales      | 60000
code - df.groupBy("department").sum("salary")
Partition 1: (1 IT, 2 HR)
Partition 2: (3 IT, 4 Sales)
So data moves between executors. This is shuffle

Visualizing shuffle -
Before Shuffle:
Executor 1
 ├── IT
 └── HR
Executor 2
 ├── IT
 └── Sales
After Shuffle:
Executor 1
 ├── IT
 ├── IT
 └── ...
Executor 2
 ├── HR
 ├── Sales
 └── ...
 Data has crossed the network. That's expensive.
Because shuffle involves: network I/O, serialization, disk I/O, memory, CPU
Therefore: A large shuffle is often one of the biggest performance bottlenecks in Spark.

Which operations cause shuffle?
groupBy(), join(), distinct(), orderBy(), repartition()

Narrow vs Wide transformations?
Narrow transformation - Data doesn't need to move between partitions
Examples: filter(), select(), withColumn()
Wide transformation - Data needs to move between partitions
Example: groupBy(), join(), orderBy(), distinct()

RDD?
RDD — Resilient Distributed Dataset
A distributed collection of objects partitioned across machines that can be processed in parallel.

DataFrame?
DataFrame is a distributed collection of data organized into named columns. (You can think of it as a table)
PySpark DataFrame is distributed across partitions, potentially across many machines.

DataFrame vs RDD?
RDD is the lower-level abstraction. You generally work with objects/records directly
In DataFrame, will work with Rows -> Columns -> Schema (all details like datatype, metadata, ...)

Why DataFrames are usually preferred over RDD?
In RDD, spark doesn't know much about the structure of your data
In DataFrame, Spark understands schema, datatype and metadata. This lets Spark optimize the query.

PySpark vs Pandas?
Pandas mailnly Designed primarily for Single machine (For smaller datasets, local processing)
PySpark Designed for Distributed processing (For huge datasets, ETL, distributed transformations, data lakes)

Predicate pushdown?
Predicate pushdown means if we use filter instead of reading all data and filter, spark Ask storage for relevant data
This can dramatically reduce I/O.

Column pruning?
Column pruning means if we have 10columns but for transformation / action we need only 4 columns means Spark can often read only the required columns

Parquet?
Parquet is a columnar storage format

Fault tolerance?
Spark tracks how data was derived through its execution lineage. If an intermediate partition disappears, Spark can often recompute it from the source/lineage rather than requiring the entire application to restart.

Repartition vs Coalesce?
df.repartition(20) -> This generally causes a shuffle and redistributes data across 20 partitions.
df.coalesce(20) -> commonly used to reduce partitions with less/no full shuffle in appropriate cases. Useful before writing output when you have too many small files.

Data skew?
Data:
India       900 million rows
USA         50 million
UK          20 million
Germany     10 million
groupBy("country") -> One partition may get a disproportionately large amount of data. That's Data skew

67